
“The Luncheon”
Jeffrey Archer
She waved at me across a crowded room at the St. Regis Hotel in New York. I waved
back, realizing I knew the face but unable to place it. She squeezed past waiters and
guests and had reached me before I had the chance to ask anyone who she was. I racked
that section of my brain that is meant to store people, but it transmitted no reply. I
realized I would have to resort to the old party trick of carefully worded questions until
her answers jogged my memory.
“How 
are 
you, darling?” she cried, and threw her arms around me, an opening
that didn’t help, since we were at a Literary Guild cocktail party, and anyone will throw
their arms around you on such occasions, even the directors of the Book-of-the-Month
Club. From her accent she was clearly American, and she looked to be approaching forty
but thanks to the genius of modern make-up may even have overtaken it. She wore a long
white cocktail dress and her blonde hair was done up in one of those buns that looks like
a brioche. The overall effect made her appear somewhat like a chess queen. Not that the
cottage loaf helped, because she might have had dark hair flowing to her shoulders when
we last met. I do wish women would realize that when they change their hairstyle they
often achieve exactly what they set out to do: look completely different to any
unsuspecting male.
“I’m well, thank you,” I said to the white queen. “And you?” I inquired as my
opening gambit.
“I’m just fine, darling,” she replied, taking a glass of champagne from a passing
waiter.
“And how’s the family,” I asked, not sure if she even had one.
“They’re all well,” she replied. No help there. “And how is Louise?” she inquired.
“Blooming,” I said. So she knew my wife. But then, not necessarily, I thought.
Most American women are experts at remembering men’s wives. They have to be, when
on the New York circuit they change so often it becomes a greater challenge than the
Times
 crossword.
“Have you been to London lately?” I roared above the babble. A brave question,
as she may never have been to Europe.
“Only once since we had lunch together.” She looked at me quizzically. “You
don’t remember who I am, do you?” she asked as she devoured a cocktail sausage.
I smiled.
“Don’t be silly, Susan,” I said. “How could I ever forget?”
She smiled.
I confess that I remembered the white queen’s name in the nick of time. Although
I still only had vague recollections of the lady, I certainly would never forget the lunch.
I had just had my first book published, and the critics on both sides of the Atlantic had
been complimentary, even if the checks from my publishers were less so. My agent had
told me on several occasions that I shouldn’t write if I wanted to make money. This
created a dilemma, because I couldn’t see how to make money if I didn’t write.
It was around this time that the lady who was now facing me and chattering on,
oblivious to my silence, telephoned from New York to heap lavish praise on my novel.
There is no writer who does enjoy receiving such calls, although I confess to having been
less captivated by an eleven-year-old girl who called me collect from California to say
she had found a spelling mistake on page 47 and warned that she would call again if she
found another. However, this particular lady might have ended her transatlantic
congratulations with nothing more than good-bye if she had not dropped her own name.
It was one of those names that can, on the spur of the moment, always book a table at a
chic restaurant or a seat at the opera, which mere mortals like myself would have found
impossible to attain given a months notice. To be fair, it was her husband’s name that had
achieved the reputation, as one of the world’s most distinguished film producers.
“When I’m next in London you must have lunch with me,” came crackling down
the phone.
“No,” said I gallantly, “you must have lunch with 
me
.”
“How perfectly charming you English always are,” she said.
I have often wondered how much American women get away with when they say
those few words to an Englishman. Nevertheless, the wife of an Oscar-winning producer
does not phone one everyday.
“I promise to call you when I’m next in London,” she said.
And indeed she did, for almost six months to the day she telephoned again, this
time from the Connaught Hotel, to declare how much she was looking forward to our
meeting.
“Where would you like to have lunch?” I said, realizing a second too late, when
she replied with the name of one of the most exclusive restaurants in town, that I should
have made sure it was I who chose the venue. I was glad she couldn’t see my forlorn face
as she added airly, “Monday, one o’clock. Leave the booking to me—I’m known there.”
On the day in question I donned my one respectable suit, a new shirt I had been
saving for a special occasion since Christmas, and the only tie that looked as if it hadn’t
been previously used to hold up my trousers. I then strolled over to my bank and asked
for statement of my current account. The teller handed me a long piece of paper unworthy
of its amount. I studied the figure as one who has to make a major financial decision. The
bottom stating in black lettering that I was in credit to the sum of thirty-seven pounds and
sixty-three pence. I wrote out a check for thirty-seven pounds. I feel that the gentleman
should always leave his account in credit, and I might add it was a belief my bank
manager shared with me. I then walked up to Mayfair for my luncheon date.
As I entered the restaurant I noticed too many waiters and plush seats for my
liking. You can’t eat either, but you can be charged for them. At a corner table sat for two
sat a woman who, although not young, was elegant. She wore a blouse of powder blue
crepe-de-chine, and her blond hair was rolled away from her face in style that reminded
me of the war years and had once again become fashionable. It was clearly my
transatlantic admirer, and she greeted me in the same “I’ve known you all my life” as she
was to do at the Literary Guild cocktail party years later. Although she had a drink in
front of her, I didn’t order an aperitif, explaining that I never drank before lunch—and I
would have liked to add, “but as soon as your husband makes a film of my novel, I will.”
She launched immediately into the latest Hollywood gossip, not so much
dropping names as reciting them, while I ate my way through the potato chips from the
bowl in front of me. A few minutes later a waiter materialized by the table and presented
us with two large embossed leather menus, considerably better bound than my novel. The
