He was a devil worshipper going to Hell; indeed he was. He was finally to meet His Master for a cosy fireside chat and maybe get an idea or two about satanic extravagances – how, in short, to Raise Hell, to create Hell On This Earth.

He was called Bill our worshipper, looking like the most of us, not wearing a black cape or anything outlandish, or should I say nightlandish. No, nothing like that! But for the rest he was a full-fledged Satanist, aesthetical variety. No modern, Nietzschean Anton la Vey-follower he, oh no; here we had classy stuff, like Milton, The Temptation In The Desert, The Book Of Job and the cover of Judas Priest’s ”Sad Wings Of Destiny” as inspiration; fire and brimstone and red velvet. Our Bill was a romantic worshipper, nevertheless sworn to Evil; he was the real deal, I can assure you that. He chose darkness before light, evil before good.

And now he was going to Hell to meet His Master. You might wonder how he had found the way – but let’s just say that he had, that’s enough for our story. And so one day he went away over spectral landscapes, across an unholy land with purple bushes and weird flowers and yellow clouds in the sky – and suddenly he saw a tree in the distance, a certain tree his informant had told him would be the passage to Hell.

The tree was the gateway, strangely so. But this was nothing other than The Tree Of Evil, The Radical Root Of Reeking Ressentment; it grew up through the dimensions, through the astral spheres which surrounded Earth and whose downmost level was Sheol, Abaddon, Gehenna, Hell – that is, the lowest of the Eight Heavens and thus situated above Earth.

Bill for his part approached the tree, smelling of strong resin and hung with blue and red fruits. This seems promising he thought, blue food is usually inedible, it’s sick, man! So this must be the gate to Hell. He then searched the trunk for an entrance (as he was told to do), finding an aperture and going inside – and finally there he saw a spiral staircase leading upwards, the tree being hollow with a flight of stairs inside. ”So I’d better ascend it then,” he thought.

Said and done; he started to walk up the stairs, round and round and up and up, and soon everything got dim, he felt how he passed through a dimensional gate – and suddenly he found himself on a misty moor, black mountains lining the horizon and the air heavy with sulphuric scents. He treated his lungs with the air, eagerly inhaling the stale evaporations and feeling alive, wonderously alive – and more evil than ever. Finally he was on the outskirts of Hell, soon he would meet His Master, at last he would become evil for real, a true practitioner and not just some scholarly worshipper...!

He walked over the lands, came to a sea with leaden waters, saw a foreboding ship laying at anchor, was rown out to the vessel, went aboard on its skeleton deck and greeted the captain, whom he asked to take him to The Devil himself. The captain nodded and turned the wheel, heading out over the black waters without hoisting sail. Over the main they headed, with Bill standing at the rail feeling evil thoughts bubbling up inside, a Sailor On The Seas Of Fate on his way to his first native place, his true Heimat: Hell.

Reaching a new shore and having been put ashore, Bill started walking and soon came to a town: a black burgh, built by demons. Here it was all basalt, obsidian and volcaneous minerals, it was cornices adorned with ruby and sickly green statues, it was smooth pillars and echoing valves – but nowhere a living soul to be seen! Hell was empty!

And why so? you might ask. Well, the thing of it was that Hell’s Angels had fled the field, had become bored of their shadowy existence in this Sheol, having capitulated to The Other Side for the most part. So Bill walked aimlessly along the lanes, glancing at ruins and fallen pillars and empty halls, wondering why no demon met him with its cries, why no asura greeted him welcome to Gehenna, why no devil rolled out a bloody red carpet for him. Oh well he thought, maybe he could settle down here for himself, make this his home since he had become a Knight In Satan’s Service – KISS?

He left the sombre city and went off to the villas on the outskirts, seeing a beach house that looked promising, heading for it and entering. Here he was met by rustic masonry, polished wooden floor, bizarre artwork and bookshelves with works by de Sade, Abd al-Hazred and Crowley; nodding knowingly at the spines Bill felt like being at home. Hellish Heimat for sure!

He went out on the patio, a back porch overlooking the sea, the leaden grey sea that rolled heavily against the rocks, like the waves of the Dead Sea. And whaddya know – here, in a recliner, a shape was sitting wrapped in dark robes, with a haggard face, backcombed hair, eyebrows twisted upwards and a generally satanic look. Bill felt that this was his Master, so he bowed and said:

”Mr. Satan, I presume...?”

”Yeah, that’ll be me,” the being in the recliner said.

Bill was overjoyed, started to jump around and dance, singing ”666 – The Number Of The Beast”, followed by highlights from the Black Sabbath, Demon and Mercyful Fate songbooks. The reclined being listened politely and then asked him to sit down.

Expectantly Bill obeyed, saying:

”I’m your obedient servant, here to praise you...”

”But I’m finished as an artist,” The Devil said. ”You know, ever since the dawn of time we Hellish Angels have battled against the Heavenly Host; asuras versus devas you can call it, dark angels versus good ones – and believe you me, we’ve done a lot! We’ve done our darndest to lead Man astray, teaching him devilry such as murder and adultery while devas have taught him arts and morals. We have gone for passion and melancholy, devas for piety and joy – and we, finally, seem to have lost the game.”

”Oh no, you can’t have!” Bill said. ”Earth is more miserable than ever, with warring in the Middle East, famine, overpopulation and pollution and –”

”True,” The Prince Of Darkness said, ”Man still has his free will, and maybe me and my kind have inspired to that which you mention. But only indirectly so, for our reign is more or less over, finished and kaput, concerning the astral planes. You passed through Gehenna City on your way here, right? It was a boomtown once, a city teeming with hellish life, but now it’s just an empty ruin; that’s symbolical for our whole cause.”

Bill nodded and beheld the sun shining through the mist, a faint astral sun descried through the veils. And The Devil seemed to bask in its glory, well, then it was seriously bad. Bill started to get the picture, to realize the sordid state of Evil. He said:

”So what shall I do then, poor devil worshipper that I am? Can’t I inspire you to some evil machinations, to challenge God and tempt Jesus and all those things you were so good at in the past?”

”No, you can’t,” The Devil said and produced a piece of jewellery he was holding, green with red interior. ”Because here I happen to hold The Holy Grail, given to me by a knight in shining armour. And with this object I will seek passage to Heaven.”

”Indeed,” Bill said frostily to hide his astonishment. ”So why don’t you go there right away then?”

”I will, I will. I just have to gather myself before the meeting: to meet your Havenly Father after all these years, that’s not so simple. And to meet The Brother whose earthly, transmogrified blood is in the gem, in this selfsame emerald that I hold – tthat’s not so simple either! But I will go, I will request for an audience by telepathy. I hope they receive me and hear me out, I sincerely do. Well, you just have to be honest, I guess. I’ve washed my hands in it.”

Bill didn’t like what he heard, on the contrary: he sighed and rested his head in his hands, rubbing his temples in despair. This hadn’t gone well, his long awaited meeting with The Prince Of Darkness – on the contrary, it was a disaster! Instead of meeting a vigorous, gloriously evil Principality he just saw a pathetic old has-been, dressed in ugly, worn-out clothes. It was the aesthete in Bill which revolted against it all; not only was there a lack in malignancy, no, above all there was a lack of style. Where was the blakean, miltonian Lucifer with all its melancholic beauty...? The woodroffian Devil of Judas Priest album cover fame, a handsome Adonis despairingly watching its wings go black...?

Sic transit gloria inferni...

Bill sobered up and wondered what to do. Maybe just return to Earth – and pretend like nothing, above all not mentioning anything about the sordid state of their Master to his devil worshipping friends. The truth wouldn’t go down well with them.

Oh, what to do... but maybe he himself could assume the role of The Devil! That might work; he could be a surrogate devil, an Ersatz Evil, safe from intervention from higher planes since The Devil himself had thrown in the towel and switched sides... And forsooth there was no shortage of devilry on Earth; still Man made war, murdered and committed adultery like there was no tomorrow. Still drugs were abused, still children were left astray, still criminals were saluted like heroes and the gospel of atheism was preached here, there and everywhere – at the academies, in the press and in the arts. To be frank it was a heyday for devilry!

Bill got up and said:

”Well goodby then, Mr. Devil. Still I revere you but for future times we'll have to do without you. If we’re gonna create Hell On Earth we’ll have to do it by ourselves.”

”Seems so,” The Devil said. ”Man has a free will. Goodbye.”

He leaned back in his chair, enjoying the rays of a sun that for a moment shone through the misty clouds. Bill for his part shunned the light, not liking either this astral light nor the earthly light of day. He retired into the house and visualized the Earth he had come from, longing himself back to the earthly night – and in a moment he was lying at the foot of The Tree Of Evil, The Radical Root Of Reeking Ressentiment, his passage to Gehenna. Shedding the dust he got up and made his way back to our world, in two minds but at the same time confident in the devilry he was about to carry out. Still there were possibilities to create a Hell On Earth, because Man had (as the Devil had said) still a free will.

There was in fact nothing to prevent war, adultery and murder galore! The road to ruin was all clear! So Bill danced away to familiar lands, shouting to an imaginary audience: ”Out in the fields, my brethren and sistren, let’s harrow the lands with drinking, fighting and swearing! Evil be my Good! Fire and brimstone!”
